

1998 BVA LEXIS 32966; BVA 98-33013
Board of veterans appeals (BVA)
November 06, 1998
Docket No.96-40 214

U.S. Board of Veterans Appeals
Reporter
1998 BVA LEXIS 32966; BVA 98-33013

Names Redacted By Agency


Core Terms

veteran, depression, psychiatric disorder, medical evidence, vet, disability, psychiatric, disease, major depression, well-grounded, diagnose, suicide, well grounded, psychotic, diagnose, disorder
Counsel

D. J. Drucker, Associate Counsel, ATTORNEY FOR THE BOARD
Appellant represented by:The American Legion
Opinion


On appeal from the Department of Veterans  Affairs Regional Office in Indianapolis, Indiana
THE ISSUE
Entitlement  to service connection for an acquired psychiatric   disorder,  to include post-traumatic stress disorder. 
INTRODUCTION
The veteran  had active military service from May 1981 to March 1988. This matter comes to the Board of Veterans  Appeals [Board] on appeal from an August 1995 rating decision of the Department of Veterans  Affairs [VA] Regional Office [RO] in Indianapolis, Indiana.
CONTENTIONS OF APPELLANT ON APPEAL
The veteran  contends that he has a psychiatric   disorder,  namely major depression  with psychotic  features, that originated during active service. He maintains that he was treated in service for depression  and that such treatment represents the onset of his currently diagnosed   disorder.  The veteran  further asserts that he has post-traumatic stress disorder  [PTSD] that originated in service when he was forced to testify against a supervisor  and a friend regarding homosexuality and that those individuals later committed suicide. Reference is made to the evidence of record and a favorable determination is requested.
DECISION OF THE BOARD
The Board, in accordance with the provisions of 38 U.S.C.A.  7104 [West 1991 & Supp. 1998], has reviewed and considered all of the evidence and material of record in the veteran's  claims file. Based on its review of the relevant evidence in this matter, and for the following reasons and bases, it is the decision of the Board that the veteran  has not met the initial burden of submitting evidence sufficient to justify a belief by a fair and impartial individual that the claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric   disorder,  including PTSD, is a well-grounded  claim.
FINDINGS OF FACT
1. All relevant evidence necessary for an equitable disposition of the veterans  appeal has been obtained by the RO.
2. No competent evidence has been submitted to demonstrate that the veteran  has an acquired psychiatric   disorder  related to his period of military service
2. No competent evidence has been submitted to demonstrate that the veteran  currently has PTSD.
CONCLUSION OF LAW
The veteran  has not submitted evidence of a well-grounded  claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric   disorder,  including PTSD. 38 U.S.C.A.  1131, 5107[a] [West 1991]; 38 C.F.R.  3.303, 3.304 [1998].
REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION
The veteran  is seeking service connection for an acquired psychiatric   disorder,  including PTSD. The legal question to be answered, initially, is whether the veteran  has presented evidence of a well-grounded  claim; that is, a claim that is plausible. If he has not presented a well-grounded  claim, his appeal must fail with respect to this claim and there is no duty to assist him further in the development of his claim. 38 U.S.C.A.  5107[a]. As will be explained below, the Board finds that the veterans  claim is not well grounded 
Factual Background
When examined for enlistment  into service in December 1980, the veteran  denied having depression  or nervous trouble, there was no report of psychiatric   abnormality  and he was found qualified for active service. Service medical records show that in April 1984 the veteran  was depressed  because he had lost ten pounds,  had twenty more pounds  to lose and was tired of dieting. He sought support to maintain his diet.
In late June 1985, clinical  records reveal that the veteran  was seen in the mental health clinic [MHC] with complaints of feeling fatigued and depressed.  He was observed to be alert times three, with depressed   mood  and affect. The assessment was adjustment disorder  with depressed   mood.  Approximately ten days later, in July 1985, he was seen in the MHC and appeared open, honest and cooperative. The assessment was deferred and the veteran  was apparently given a psychological evaluation test. When seen the following week, a MHC entry indicates that the veteran  showed no acute distress. The assessment was adjustment problems, marital problems and somatization and characterological traits.  Subsequent clinical  records are not referable to complaints of, or treatment for, a psychiatric   disorder.  The veteran  elected not to undergo a medical examination prior to his discharge from service, but a February 1988 record entry indicates that his medical records were reviewed, no adverse problems were noted and he was medically cleared for separation.
The veterans   job performance  evaluations in service, dated from July 1982 to March 1987, are of record. They are devoid of mention of depression,   psychiatric  problems or any difficulties with the U.S. Army Office of Special Investigations [OSI] and the Judge Advocate Corps [JAG]. The evaluations note the veterans  lack of attention to detail regarding regulations and procedures, but are otherwise mostly positive in describing his job performance. 
VA hospitalized the veteran  from November to December 1994 with complaints of strong intentions of suicide, associated with symptoms  of depression,  namely low mood,  decreased concentration  and energy, loss of interest and decreased appetite with weight loss and poor sleep.  He also reported perceptual abnormalities  and said he heard voices and saw people in his bathroom. The veteran  described increasing aggressive tendencies toward his ex-wife. He said that when he was eighteen years old, he took an overdose of alcohol  and some pills following his fathers divorce and received no treatment. In 1981 and 1985 the veteran  said he was diagnosed  in service with depression  and placed on happy pills and had seen a marriage counselor in the past, but had no prior psychiatric  hospitalizations and no ongoing psychiatric  treatment presently. The Axis I diagnosis  was major depression  with psychotic  features and at Axis II, the diagnosis  was borderline traits  on psychological testing.
VA outpatient  medical records, dated from December 1994 to October 1995, document that the veterans   psychiatric   disability  was treated with medication and outpatient  psychotherapy. They show he complained of familial and financial problems.
The veteran  underwent VA psychiatric  examination in June 1995 and complained of depression  and poor concentration,  school and job performance.  He gave a history of being depressed  all his life, with increasing depression  while in service in Germany in 1985. He said VA had treated him as an outpatient  in 1994 and hospitalized him after he developed suicidal ideations, hallucinations and agitation. The veteran  was one month from completing his college degree in science and education, but had difficulties in school because of poor concentration.  He said his father was depressed  all his life and had tried to kill himself, his mother was a Valium addict and there was alcohol  dependence in his family. The veteran  had problems with sleep  and went without sleep  for several nights. He gained fifty pounds  over the last four years and had a history of a suicide attempt, most recently a month earlier when he thought about jumping out of the window. The Axis I diagnosis  was major depression  with psychotic  features.
In an October 1995 statement, the veteran  alleged that he had PTSD as a result of interrogation from the OSI while he was stationed in Germany. The veteran  said he was called to testify against a supervisor  and friend regarding homosexuality. He said the OSI and the JAG threatened him and his family if he did not cooperate and the supervisor  and friend committed suicide. The veteran  stated that he was chronically depressed  from OSI threats. He further indicated that his current mental illness stemmed from his guilt at having to turn in a friend and supervisor  and breaking a chain of command. In his last duty station at Scott Air Face Base in Belleville, Illinois, the veteran  said he had no time to seek treatment for depression.  He worked sixteen to twenty hours a day and was horrified at a top-secret briefing he had to do for three generals. The veterans   depression  worsened with alcohol  and he attempted suicide eight times.
Analysis
According to 38 U.S.C.A.  1131, a veteran  is entitled to disability  compensation for disability  resulting from personal injury or disease  incurred in or aggravated  by service. Even if there is no record of a psychosis in service, its incurrence coincident with service will be presumed if it was manifest to a compensable degree within one year after service. While the disease  need not be diagnosed  within the presumptive period, it must be shown, by acceptable lay or medical evidence,  that there were characteristic manifestations of the disease  to the required degree. 38 U.S.C.A.  1101, 1112, 1113, 1137 [West 1998 & Supp. 1998]; 38 C.F.R.  3.307, 3.309 [1998].
A preexisting disease  or disease  will be considered to have been aggravated  by active military, naval, or air service, where there is an increase in disability  during such service, unless there is a specific finding that the increase in disability  is due to the natural progress of the disease.  38 C.F.R.  3.306 [1998].
In order to establish entitlement  to service connection for PTSD, three elements are required: a current and clear diagnosis  of PTSD; credible supporting evidence that the claimed stressor actually occurred; and medical evidence  of a causal nexus between current symptomatology and the specific claimed in-service stressor. 38 C.F.R.  3.304[f]; Cohen v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 128 [1997].
A well-grounded  claim is a plausible claim, one which is meritorious on its own or capable of substantiation. Murphy v Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 78, 81 [1990]. There must be more than an allegation, the claim must be accompanied by evidence that justifies a belief by a fair and impartial individual that the claim is plausible. Tirpak v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 609, 611 [1992]. Moreover, where a determinative issue involves a medical diagnosis  or medical causation, competent medical evidence  to the effect that the claim is plausible is required. Grottveit v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 91, 93 [1993]; Espiritu v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 492, 494-95 [1992]. A well-grounded  service connection claim generally requires medical evidence  of a current disability;  medical or, in certain circumstances, lay evidence of inservice incurrence or aggravation of a disease  or injury; and medical evidence  of a nexus between an inservice injury or disease  and a current disability.  See Epps v. Gober, 126 F.3d 1464 [1997].
The veteran  has contended that service connection should be granted for an acquired psychiatric   disorder.  Although the evidence shows that the veteran  currently has major depression  with psychotic  features, no competent medical evidence  has been submitted to show that this disability  is related to service or any incident thereof. On the other hand, the medical evidence  shows that the veteran  denied having a psychiatric   disorder  when examined for enlistment  into service and no psychiatric   abnormality  was found. While service records reflect that in 1985 the veteran  was seen in the mental health center on three occasions and variously assessed with adjustment disorder  with depressed   mood  and adjustment and marital problems, somatization and chracterological traits,  subsequent clinical  records are absolutely negative for reference to complaints of, or treatment for, a psychiatric   disorder.  Moreover, the veterans   job performance  evaluations for that time are also devoid of any reference to depression,   psychiatric  problems or OSI and JAG involvement. Nor do the medical or service records reference any physical or sexual abuse. Furthermore, the veteran  elected not to be examined when he was discharged from service in 1988 and there was no report of psychiatric   abnormality  at that time.
The first post service evidence of record of major depression  is from 1994, more than six years after the veterans  separation from service. In short, no medical opinion  or other medical evidence  relating the veterans  currently diagnosed  major depression  with psychotic  features to service or any incident of service has been presented.
Moreover, although in 1995 the veteran  told a VA examiner that he was depressed  his whole life and that the depression  worsened in 1985 in service, there is simply no medical evidence  to demonstrate that he had a diagnosed   psychiatric   disorder  prior to enlistment  that was aggravated  in service. There is no medical evidence  that the veterans  currently diagnosed  major depression  represents an increase in disability  beyond the natural progress of a pre-service disease. 
Finally, the veteran  has contended that service connection should be granted for PTSD. However, no PTSD was found in service or on separation from service. Moreover, on VA examinations after the veterans  separation from service, there was no showing that the veteran  had PTSD. Furthermore, the veteran  has submitted no evidence to show that he currently has PTSD. In short, no medical opinion  or other medical evidence  showing that the veteran  currently has PTSD has been presented. Rabideau v. Derwiniski, 2 Vet. App. 141, 143 [1992].
The veteran  is certainly capable of providing evidence of symptomatology, but a layperson is generally not capable of opining on matters requiring medical knowledge, such as the degree of disability  produced by the symptoms  or the condition causing the symptoms.  See Robinette v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 69, 74 [1995]; Heuer v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 379, 384 [1995]; Espiritu, 2 Vet. App. at 494. See also Harvey v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 390, 393-94 [1994]. Here, the veteran  has not submitted any medical opinion  or other medical evidence  that supports his claim. The evidence now of record fails to show that the veteran  has an acquired psychiatric   disorder,  or PTSD, related to service or any incident thereof. Thus, this claim may not be considered well grounded.   38 U.S.C.A.  1101 1112, 1113, 1131, 1137, 5107[a]; 38 C.F.R.  3.303, 3.307, 3.309. Since the claim is not well grounded,  it must be denied. See Edenfield v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 384, 390 [1995].
Although the Board has disposed of the claim of entitlement  to service connection for an acquired psychiatric   disorder,  including PTSD, on a ground different from that of the RO, that is, whether the veteran's  claim is well grounded  rather than whether he is entitled to prevail on the merits, the veteran  has not been prejudiced by the Board's decision. In assuming that the claim was well grounded,  the RO accorded the veteran  greater consideration than his claim warranted under the circumstances. Bernard v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 384, 392-94 [1993].
ORDER
Service connection for an acquired psychiatric   disorder,  including PTSD, is denied.
 WAYNE M. BRAEUER Member, Board of Veterans'  Appeals
NOTICE  OF APPELLATE RIGHTS: Under 38 U.S.C.A.  7266 [West 1991 & Supp. 1998], a decision of the Board of Veterans'  Appeals granting less than the complete benefit, or benefits, sought on appeal is appealable to the United States Court of Veterans  Appeals within 120 days from the date of mailing of notice  of the decision, provided that a Notice  of Disagreement concerning an issue which was before the Board was filed with the agency of original jurisdiction on or after November 18, 1988. Veterans'  Judicial Review Act, Pub. L. No. 100-687, 402, 102 Stat. 4105, 4122 [1988]. The date which appears on the face of this decision constitutes the date of mailing and the copy of this decision which you have received is your notice  of the action taken on your appeal by the Board of Veterans'  Appeals.

U.S. Board of Veterans Appeals


End of Document
Page 2 of 21998 BVA LEXIS 32966; BVA 98-33013
Evan Seamone
Evan Seamone

