

1999 BVA LEXIS 32973; BVA 99-33015
Board of veterans appeals (BVA)
November 23, 1999
Docket No.94-31 435

U.S. Board of Veterans Appeals
Reporter
1999 BVA LEXIS 32973; BVA 99-33015

Names Redacted By Agency


Core Terms

veteran, psychiatric, disorder, diagnose, psychosis, bipolar, schizoaffective, outpatient, foot, schizophrenia, depression, symptom, diagnose, military, clinic, harass, beach
Counsel

L. McCain Parson, Associate Counsel, ATTORNEY FOR THE BOARD
Opinion


On appeal from the Department of Veterans  Affairs Regional Office in Los Angeles, California
THE ISSUE
Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric  disability.
WITNESS AT HEARINGS ON APPEAL
Appellant
INTRODUCTION
The veteran  had active military service  from December 1973 to May 1974. The veteran  was honorably discharged. 
This appeal comes before the Board of Veteran's  Appeals [Board] on appeal from a February 1996 rating decision by the Department of Veterans  Affairs [VA] Regional Office [RO] in Los Angeles, California. This matter was previously before the Board in July 1999 and has returned following a Remand for a travel Board hearing. The appeal is once again before the Board for appellate consideration.
Following the September 1999 video conference hearing held in lieu of a personal hearing before a member of the Board, the record was held open for 30 days to allow the veteran  to submit any additional evidence. In September 1999, following the videoconference hearing, the veteran  submitted 18 pages of evidence and waived consideration by the agency of original jurisdiction in favor of direct consideration by the Board.
Effective March 1, 1999, the United States Court of Veterans  Appeals changed its name to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans  Claims [hereinafter, the Court].
FINDINGS OF FACT
1. All relevant evidence necessary for an equitable disposition of this claim has been obtained by the RO, to the extent possible.
2. The veteran's   schizoaffective   disorder,   bipolar  type, had its onset  during his period of active duty  service.
CONCLUSION OF LAW
Resolving all doubt in favor of the veteran,  a schizoaffective   disorder,   bipolar  type, was incurred during military service.   38 U.S.C.A.  1110, 5107 [West 1991]; 38 C.F.R.  3.102, 3.303 [1999].
REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION
A review of the record reflects that the veteran  has a current diagnosis  of a schizoaffective   disorder,   bipolar  type, as shown by a report of VA examination dated December 1998. The veteran  has provided lay evidence as to in-service  incurrence; and a medically based nexus has been indicated between service and the current psychiatric   diagnosis,  based on the December 1998 report. Therefore, the Board determines that the veteran's  claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric   disorder  is well-grounded in accordance with 38 U.S.C.A.  5107[a]. See Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 489, 504, 506 [1995]; see also Epps v. Gober 126 F.3d 1464, 1468 [Fed. Cir. 1997].
At the outset, the Board acknowledges that the RO has attempted to secure treatment records contemporaneous to the veteran's  period of service and immediately thereafter. Specifically, the RO requested records for the veteran  in December 1997 with the following replies: [1] no records for the above named veteran  at the Los Angeles outpatient  clinic, and; [2] no medical documentation can be located at our facility and no perpetual information at this time for the period of May 1974 to September 1979 at the West Los Angeles VA Medical Center. A handwritten note affixed to a computer generated request for the latter reflects - unable to locate volume I of II. On a thorough review of the claims folder, treatment records dated from May to December 1974 from the Long Beach VA hospital are of record. The Board is satisfied that to the extent possible the RO has extended sufficient effort in assisting the veteran  to develop relevant facts pertinent to his claim. No further assistance to the veteran  is required to comply with the duty to assist as mandated by 38 U.S.C.A.  5107[a].
In order to establish service connection for a claimed disability, the facts, as shown by the evidence, must demonstrate that a particular disease  or injury resulting in current disability was incurred coincident with service in the Armed Forces. See 38 U.S.C.A.  1110 [West 1991]; 38 C.F.R.  3.303[a] [1999]. In addition, certain chronic diseases,  including a psychosis,  may be presumed to have been incurred during service if they become manifest to a degree of 10 percent within one year after separation from active duty.  See 38 U.S.C.A.  1101, 1112, 1113, 1131; 38 C.F.R.  3.307, 3.309 [1999].
Pertinent regulations also provide that service connection may be granted for any disease   diagnosed  after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease  was incurred in service. See 38 C.F.R.  3.303[d] [1999]. When, after consideration of all the evidence, a reasonable doubt  arises regarding service origin, such doubt will be resolved in favor of the veteran.  See 38 C.F.R.  3.102. A reasonable doubt  is one which exists because of an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence which does not satisfactorily prove or disprove the claim. 38 U.S.C.A.  5107[b] [West 1991].
In essence, the veteran  contends that his psychiatric   disorder  had its onset  in service and is the result of discrimination, ridicule, and harassment. He was treated in 1974 at the Fort Ord Hospital. Two weeks after his discharge from service, he was medicated  with Tofranil prescribed by the Brentwood VA hospital. He reports that he never used PCP and does not know what it is. The veteran  also reports that he has never been hospitalized for any type of drug or alcohol problem and has never been in any type of drug or rehabilitation program.
The service medical records for the period of October 1973 to May 1974 reflect a normal psychiatric evaluation  on enlistment and separation. The May 1974 separation physical examination reflects: summary of defects and diagnoses - no complaints and a history of fracture of the 3rd, 4th, and 5th metatarsals. The records in evidence reflect that the veteran  was on profile from January 1974, the month a fire extinguisher fell on his foot,  until separating  from service.
VA inpatient and outpatient  treatment records for the period of May 1974 to September 1997, reflect that in December 1974 the veteran's   psychiatric  status was evaluated  as normal. A June 1975 entry reflects that the veteran  was having headaches that were later described as tension headaches for the period from January 1976 to September 1979 and medicated  with Codeine.
Records of a VA hospitalization  for the period of March to April 1977 reflect that the veteran  was laid off from his post office job four days prior to admission and that his behavior for the past day or so had been extremely bizarre. The veteran  admitted to having a history of illicit drug use four days prior to admission. He was not clear as to whether he had used drugs 24 hours prior to admission. He reported that he had been medicated  with Tofranil through the Brentwood VA and that the last dose he had taken prior to his admission had made him extremely lightheaded and produced strange feelings. He reported that his mother gave him four pills. It was thought that the veteran  was suffering from drug induced toxic psychosis  but there were signs that possibly the veteran  might also have elements of a schizoid personality. The drug abuse  screen was negative for barbiturates, alcohol, and amphetamines. The admitting diagnosis  was drug psychosis  rule out schizophrenia.  The discharge diagnosis  was psychosis  secondary to drug abuse.  It was also noted during this admission that the veteran  would not answer questions put to him. An August 1985 amendment to the April 1977 discharge summary completed by Jack M. Shull, Chief Medical Administration Service, reflects acute psychosis  of unknown etiology.
VA entries dated in September 1977 reflect that the veteran  was evaluated  for a stress reaction from work and an assessment of personality disorder.  He was evaluated  in October 1977 complaining of feeling nervous  and unable to relax. The impression  was personality disorder. 
In June 1978, the veteran  requested psychiatric evaluation  because his mind sped up and wandered and that he had previously attended the Brentwood VA hospital mental health clinic. The impression  was anxiety reaction. The veteran  was evaluated  for a nervous  condition in June and July 1978.
The veteran  was admitted to VA hospital in October 1979 in an almost catatonic state. The records reflect that the veteran  was an outpatient  at the Brentwood VA. The drug screen was positive for codeine, which the veteran  reported he took for pain. The admission diagnosis  was depressive psychosis,  rule out drug-induced psychosis,  and rule out schizophrenia.  The assessment was possible schizoid personality concomitant with drug . The impression  was psychosis  secondary to drug abuse  -[PCP]. A December 1979 entry reflects anxiety neurosis. Thereafter, outpatient  treatment records reflect that the veteran  was nervous  and anxious.
A discharge summary from the VA Medical Center at Long Beach dated in October 1981 reflects a diagnosis  of schizophrenia,  paranoid type; that the veteran  had a breakdown in the Army; and that he was in the Army hospital for a few weeks. Since then the veteran  has been seen in this facility three or four times for a few weeks . . . A March 1982 psychiatric evaluation  reflects by veteran's  report that his first psychiatric   hospitalization  was in 1977 or 1976 at Brentwood VA hospital at which time he started having bad problems. The veteran  was subsequently re-hospitalized in 1977, 1979, and 1981 at the Long Beach VA hospital. Other records reflect that the veteran  continued to be nervous  and anxious.
A November 1983 entry reflects that hospital records for admission in October 1979 make no mention of stress at work as a precipitating factor and that the veteran  came in to explain what led up to the hospitalization.  The veteran  reported that it began with his being arrested for murder and released. His coworkers would make remarks and accuse him of murder. He produced letters of reprimands and a suspension for failing to report for work which were later rescinded when shown to be false - the veteran  had been hospitalized. The veteran  had a lot of material showing great problems at work. If the facts are as described by the veteran,  this examiner  would agree that the circumstances could have contributed to his need for hospitalization.  An October 1984 VA examination conducted at the Brentwood VA Medical Center refers to the veteran's  report of psychiatric   symptoms  since service and a diagnosis  of schizophrenia,  disorganized.
The evidence of record thereafter is consistent with psychiatric  admissions and treatment for schizophrenia,  paranoid type; generalized anxiety disorder,   depression,  insomnia, bipolar   disorder,  adjustment disorder  with mixed features, rule out organic mood disorder,  polysubstance abuse, rule out personality disorder,  and depressive disorder  not otherwise specified.
A lay statement received by the RO in February 1998 from O. Littleton reflects that he knew the veteran  prior to military service  and that when the veteran  returned home after service he was never quite the same quick witted, energetic, ambitious person as before, except for his courteous manner.
Authorized VA examinations were conducted by physicians at East West Medical Group in December 1998. The orthopedic fee basis examination conducted by Dr. Workmon details the incident where the veteran  injured his foot  in the day room while on active duty  and that medical treatment was delayed. The internal medicine examination completed by Dr. J. Tamiry reflects that the examiner  reviewed current medical records in their entirety and that the veteran  developed post traumatic stress disorder  with an onset  date in 1974 and the same diagnosis  date. He was diagnosed  by a psychiatrist in Brentwood. The psychiatric  examination conducted by Dr. D. Bedrin reflects that the information for the following evaluation was obtained from the veteran.  The veteran  reported that they tried to manhandle him in-service  and he broke down. The veteran  reported that he gets depressed and has done so off and on since separating  from service. He reported panic attacks and could not describe the symptoms  of any panic attacks. He reported that since his discharge from the service his life has been all downhill and a total disaster. The veteran  has had regular outpatient  mental health treatment since 1974. He receives mental health treatment one to two times a month. Currently, he is medicating with Stelazine and Cogentin. The veteran  denied drug or alcohol treatment programs. He began drinking alcohol in-service  and never drank much or heavily. He denied drug use. The examiner  reported that the entire medical record was reviewed and that there was a positive urine toxicology screen dated in December 1996 for cocaine and marijuana. The Axis I diagnosis  according to Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,  Fourth Edition, of the American Psychiatric  Association [DSM-IV] criteria is schizoaffective   disorder,   bipolar  type. The examiner  opined that the veteran's   psychiatric   symptoms  appear to have begun just prior to being discharged  from the military when he reacted to an incident. Something happened in the orderly room. The examiner  added that most of his symptoms  began after he was discharged  from service.
Testimony from the September 1999 videoconference reflects that the veteran  was harassed and under pressure because he broke three bones in his foot  and that was the first time he experienced racism, his drill sergeant tried/made him walk up a hill with a broken foot  in January 1974. Some guys in his company carried him out . They just dogged me out while I was in the service. It took 6 hours to see a doctor for his foot.  He was harassed for the duration of his time in service. They gave me depression  because he broke his foot.  He had blackout spells during that time. He had one in service in the audio room when they wanted to jump on me. His first drill sergeant placed him in the holding barracks thereafter. He was discharged,  he was sent home in an iridescent suit and sent to Leavenworth. About two weeks after service, he was evaluated  at the Los Angeles, Brentwood VA hospital and medicated  with Tegretol. He took that medication for about 2 years and 8 months. In April 1977, he was fired from his job at the post office. He was medicated  with approximately 400 milligrams of Tegretol. He began to act strange. He was admitted to a locked ward in restraints at the Long Beach VA hospital. He does not recall his initial diagnosis.  He sought copies of his medical treatment at Brentwood. He was told the records were lost. In 1977, he was diagnosed  with psychosis,   schizophrenia.  When he has been under depression,  he has heard voices at night. He is paranoid a lot. He cannot deal with crowds. When he is under extreme pressure, he cannot deal with a lot of problems. When he is under pressure, he gets panic attacks. He does not black out, but he does not remember what happened. He believes that the racial injustice he received during service was utilized as a mechanism to discharge him.
A September 1999 statement from the veteran's  mother reflects that the veteran  had been on medication prescribed by VA since separating  from service. In March 1977, he was going through changes and was not himself. She called the VA in regards to his behavior. She was instructed to give him 100 milligrams of Tofranil. It did not seem to work, so she gave him more, approximately four pills. Then, he started to act bizarre. She took him to the Long Beach VA hospital and had him admitted.
When considering the evidence in its totality, the Board determines that the veteran's  reported history of an incident in service, treatment immediately following service, the subsequent evaluation and treatment, and current findings on VA authorized examinations are essentially consistent with the veteran  having been treated as early as two weeks after discharge for psychiatric   symptoms,  and at the latest sometime in 1974 at the Los Angeles - Brentwood VA outpatient  clinic.
Although the service medical records do not contain a notation of the harassing incident, there is documentation of the foot  injury that purportedly occurred at the same time. It appears from a reading of the record that a line of duty determination was not conducted, which may or may not be of significance. On balance, the evidence reflects a normal psychiatric evaluation  in December 1974, and that the veteran  experienced what he described as harassment at his place of employment, which is predated by tension headaches and stress in June 1975. However, this evidence in conjunction with the clinical record that contains references to treatment at the Brentwood VA outpatient   psychiatric  clinic in 1974, psychiatric  treatment thereafter with diagnoses that include schizoaffective   disorder,   bipolar  type, as well as the December 1998 VA authorized psychiatric  examination, which contains a medical opinion that the veteran's   psychiatric   symptoms  appear to have begun just prior to being discharged  from the military when he reacted to an incident - something happened in the orderly room, tends to support a finding that an acquired psychiatric   disorder  had its onset  in service. As such, the veteran's  contention that his psychiatric  disability originated during service is supported by the December 1998 medical diagnosis  and opinion rendered after extensive evaluation of the veteran  and review of entire record, and is opposed by the lack of documented psychiatric  problems during service. However, the medical data of record as a whole lends support, in effect, to both conclusions. In such cases, where the evidentiary record is in equipoise, the benefit of the doubt must be resolved in the veteran's  favor. 38 U.S.C.A.  5107[b]; 38 C.F.R.  3.102. Therefore, with the resolution of all reasonable doubt  in the veteran's  favor, the Board concludes that service connection for a schizoaffective   disorder,   bipolar  type, is warranted.
ORDER
Service connection for a schizoaffective   disorder,   bipolar  type, is granted.
 Deborah W. Singleton Member, Board of Veterans'  Appeals

U.S. Board of Veterans Appeals


End of Document
Page 2 of 21999 BVA LEXIS 32973; BVA 99-33015
Evan Seamone
Evan Seamone

