

2004 BVA LEXIS 36704;  BVA 04-23568
Board of Veterans Appeals (BVA)
August 26, 2004
Docket No. 03-23 436

U.S. Board of Veterans Appeals
Reporter
2004 BVA LEXIS 36704;  BVA 04-23568

Names Redacted By Agency


Core Terms

veteran, major depression, depression, file a motion, interrogate, disorder, psychiatric disorder, reconsider, diagnose, military, stressor, sexual, psychologist, reopen, motion to vacate, accredit
Counsel

M Tenner, Associate Counsel, ATTORNEY FOR THE BOARD; Appellant represented by: Jewish War Veterans of the United States; WITNESS AT HEARING ON APPEAL: Appellant
Opinion


On appeal from the Department of Veterans  Affairs Regional Office in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
THE ISSUE
Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric  disorder,  to include major depression  and post-traumatic stress disorder  (PTSD).
  INTRODUCTION
The veteran  served on active duty from November 1965 to December 1966.
This matter comes before the Board of Veterans'  Appeals (Board) on appeal from a January 2002 rating decision of the Department of Veterans  Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania that denied service connection for any nervous condition, to include anxiety disorder,  major depression  or PTSD. The veteran  filed a notice of disagreement in January 2002. She was afforded a Statement Of the Case in July 2003. The RO received the veteran's  substantive appeal in August 2003.
In April 2004, the veteran  testified before the undersigned Veterans  Law Judge during a videoconference hearing at the RO. A transcript of the proceeding is of record. Prior to the hearing in April 2004, the Board received additional evidence, namely, a March 2004 letter from the veteran's  treating  physician and a letter from a fellow service comrade. The evidence was submitted without a waiver of initial consideration by the RO. See generally, 38 C.F.R. § 20.1304. However, in light of the Board's action below, there is no prejudice by failing to remand the matter to the RO for initial review of the evidence.
  FINDING OF FACT
The veteran  has confirmed diagnoses of major depression  and PTSD that have been linked to service.
  CONCLUSION OF LAW
The criteria for service connection for an acquired psychiatric  disorder,  to include major depression  and PTSD, have been met. 38 U.S.C.A. §§ 1110, 5107 (West 2002); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304(f) (2003).
  REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION
I. Duties to Notify and Assist
The Veteran's  Claims Assistance Act (VCAA), and its implementing regulations, essentially eliminates the requirement that a claimant  submit evidence of a well- grounded claim. See 38 U.S.C.A. §§ 5100, 5102, 5103, 5103A, 5107, and 5126 (West 2002); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102, 3.156, 3.159, and 3.326 (2002). The VCAA and its implementing regulations provide that VA will assist a claimant  in obtaining evidence necessary to substantiate a claim, including obtaining medical examinations or opinions if necessary. VA is not required to provide assistance to a claimant,  however, if there is no reasonable possibility that such assistance would aid in substantiating  the claim. See id.
The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans  Claims (Court) has concluded that the VCAA was not applicable where further assistance would not aid the appellant in substantiating  his or her claim. Wensch v. Principi, 15 Vet App 362 (2001); see 38 U.S.C.A. § 5103A(a)(2) (Secretary not required to provide assistance "if no reasonable possibility exists that such assistance would aid in substantiating  the claim"). In this case, by letter of March 2001, the RO advised the appellant of the criteria for claims for service connection, and provided an opportunity to submit any evidence pertinent to the claim. However, in view of the Board's favorable decision in this appeal, further assistance is unnecessary to aid the appellant in substantiating  her claim.
II. Background and Analysis
The veteran  contends that her current psychiatric  disorders,  to include major depression  and PTSD are the result of the military  interrogation during service concerning her sexual preference. 
The veteran's  service medical records do not reveal complaints, treatment or diagnoses of any psychiatric  disorder,  to include PTSD. Her discharge examination, which was otherwise normal, did not include a psychiatric  evaluation. The veteran's  original DD 214 included an undesirable discharge due to unfitness (homosexuality).
In 1981, the veteran  appealed the characterization of her discharge to the Naval Discharge Review Board. Records associated with that proceeding indicated that in December 1966, the veteran  made sworn statements admitting to homosexual interests and acts with another enlisted soldier. In appealing the discharge determination, the veteran  contended that she was interrogated  for several hours concerning the incidents. She noted that the event left her feeling frightened and extremely intimidated. She asserted that her service in the Navy was rewarding and educational. She stated prior to such time, she had committed no criminal or devious acts that would endanger the security of the U.S. Navy and had intended on completing her tour of duty or possibly reenlisting. The Naval Discharge Review Board found that the veteran's  service records were devoid or any other disciplinary acts, and upon discharge her final military  behavior and OTA marks were 3.0. In September 1981, the veteran's  service was recharacterized as honorable.
Social Security Administration disability determination records are associated with the claims file. A May 1986 mental status examination noted that the veteran  had been depressed  for years. Recent changes in her life had forced her to seek treatment again. The assessment was chronic depressive  personality disorder  and dysthymic disorder.  During a May 1989 psychiatric  examination the veteran  stated that her depression  began when she was "a kid". She stated that she was hospitalized in 1973 for a psychiatric  condition. She was on no medication or treatment. Following a mental status examination, she was diagnosed  with dysthymic disorder. 
VA outpatient treatment records from January 2001 to July 2002 are of record. They reflect that the veteran  was initially seen for treatment in January 2001 with complaints of depression,  suicidal and homicidal ideation and paranoia. She was initially assessed, in February 2001, with major depression,  delusional disorder  and alcohol abuse. In a May 2001 note, the veteran  reported that in 1966 she was picked up and interrogated  like a criminal about her sexual orientation.  She stated that she returned home disgraced and confronted her angry family. Thereafter, she was reportedly,  too depressed  to work or concentrate in school. In a June 2001 note, the veteran  reported that her discharge due to her sexual preference  was devastating. During a July 2001 mental health  clinic session, the veteran  discussed the contrast between her self prior to and after serving in the Navy. She stated that prior to the Navy she was an active person with a sense of self and enough guts to join the military. 
In a VA outpatient note, dated in August 2001, the veteran  reported that she was summoned from work in December 1966 and taken away by car by Naval investigators. They reportedly,  interrogated  her for hours and searched through her personal belongings. She was then forced to clean, wash and wax the barracks. The veteran  stated that she became so scared and frustrated that she smashed her hand through a window. The veteran's  treating  psychologist  opined  that she had suffered from depression  since the mid-1960's when she received an undesirable discharge from the Navy, essentially due to her sexual orientation. 
In an August 2001 statement, A. M. Haupt, PhD, licensed psychologist,  indicated that she had treated the veteran  from 1977 to 1984, and that the veteran  was diagnosed  with major depression,  chronic with severe suicidity.
A November 2001 treatment record indicated that the veteran  was treated for symptoms  of PTSD and depression  linked to punitive circumstances of her discharge in the military. 
In a March 2002 statement, the veteran's  brother indicated that he had served as a Naval Officer, and; that from 1987 to 1989, he was the Director of NIS. In this capacity, he described the interrogation practices of NIS.
In a March 2002 statement, [redacted], who is identified as a family member and as a licensed social worker, indicated that since the veteran's  discharge from service, she observed the veteran  to be depressed,  angry, confused, and exhibiting aggressive behavior. She related that the family feared for the veteran's  safety. She also indicated that when the veteran  learned that she could not change her discharge, her depression  and aggression grew worse. According to Ms. [redacted], the veteran's  discharge had a major impact on the her mental health  and stability, and that her military  experience had shattered her plans for a productive life.
In a March 2002 medical statements, which was prepared by M. F. Gliatto, M.D. (attending psychiatrist) , and D. E. Bloch, PhD (clinical psychologist) , the mental health  professionals entered diagnoses of major depression  and PTSD, and opined  that the symptoms  of such mental disorders  began during the veteran's  period of service.
VA outpatient records through July 2002 show continuing treatment for major depression  and PTSD.
A March 2004 letter from a service comrade indicated that she served with the veteran  through boot camp. The veteran  was reportedly  animated and excited to serve in the Navy. Thereafter, the two were sent to separate duty stations. The service comrade indicated that she next saw in November 1997 but that the veteran  was quiet and socially disengaged.
A March 2004 letter from the veteran's  treating  psychiatrist  and psychologist  indicate that the veteran  was treated for PTSD and major depression.  The mental health  professionals opined  that the veteran's  symptoms  of major depression  and PTSD were more likely than not due her treatment at the base when she was accused of homosexual conduct.
During the videoconference hearing in April 2004, the veteran  indicated that she had no disciplinary or performance problems in the military.  She recounted that in 1966, she was taken from her workplace to a room and interrogated  for several hours. She said she was forced to write down, in detail, the nature and extent of her sexual encounters while in service. Thereafter, she was reportedly,  scrutinized and humiliated by her interrogators regarding her sexual orientation.  Following her discharge, she reportedly  became very depressed  and was scared to engage in personal relationships or seek employment.
Under the laws administered by VA, service connection may be granted for a disability resulting from disease or injury incurred in service. 38 U.S.C.A. §§ 1110, 1131 (West 2002); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (2003). If a condition noted during service is not shown to be chronic, then generally a showing of continuity of symptomatology after service is required for service connection. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b) (2003). Service connection may be granted on the basis of a post-service initial diagnosis of a condition, when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.
The Board also observes that service connection for PTSD requires: (1) medical evidence diagnosing the condition in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.125(a) (2003); (2) a link, established by medical evidence, between current symptoms  and an in-service  stressor;  and (3) credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service  stressor  occurred. If the evidence establishes that the veteran  engaged in combat with the enemy, and the claimed stressor  is related to that combat, his lay testimony alone may establish the occurrence of the claimed in-service  stressor  in the absence of clear and convincing evidence to the contrary, provided that the claimed in-service  stressor  is consistent with the circumstances, conditions, or hardships of his service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f) (2003). See Cohen v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 128 (1997).
Taking into account the relevant evidence outlined above, and resolving all reasonable doubt in the veteran's  favor, the Board finds that service connection for an acquired psychiatric  disorder,  diagnosed  as major depressive  disorder  and PTSD is warranted. In this respect, the evidence shows that the veteran  is currently treated for major depression  and PTSD. She receives treatment for the conditions exclusively through the VA medical center. Moreover, her treating  psychiatrist  and psychologist  have opined,  both in the treatment records and in letters to VA, that the veteran's  major depressive  disorder  and PTSD are more likely than not due to her treatment in the Navy. The records from the Naval Discharge Review Board confirm that the veteran  was interrogated  about her sexual preference  during service. While the records do not detail her reaction to being interrogated,  the Board finds credible the lay statements from the veteran  and her family members regarding the severity of the incident, and further accepts as probative the statement from the treating  psychologist  that the event had a traumatic impact on the veteran.  While the record does not corroborate every detail of the veteran's  alleged stressor,  the Board finds that the evidence appears consistent with the veteran's  assertions. Moreover, corroboration of every detail of a claimed stressor  is not required. See Pentecost v. Principi, 16 Vet. App.124 (2002); Suozzi v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. App. 307, 311 (1997). The Board notes that there is nothing in the record that specifically contradicts the veteran's  account of events in service. The Board acknowledges that the evidence of record does not show treatment for a psychiatric  disorder  during service or within a year following service. Nevertheless, the preponderance of the evidence weighs in favor of the veteran.  Accordingly, the claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric  disorder  is granted.
  ORDER
Service connection for an acquired psychiatric  disorder,  diagnosed  as major depression  and PTSD, is granted.
  ____________________________________________       DEBORAH W. SINGLETON       Veterans  Law Judge, Board of Veterans'  Appeals  
 Department of Veterans  Affairs
YOUR RIGHTS TO APPEAL OUR DECISION
The attached decision by the Board of Veterans'  Appeals (BVA or Board) is the final decision  for all issues addressed in the "Order" section of the decision. The Board may also choose to remand an issue or issues to the local VA office for additional development. If the Board did this in your case, then a "Remand" section follows the "Order." However, you cannot appeal an issue remanded to the local VA office because a remand is not a final decision.  The advice below on how to appeal a claim applies only to issues that were allowed, denied, or dismissed in the "Order." If you are satisfied with the outcome of your appeal, you do not need to do anything. We will return your file to your local VA office to implement the BVA's decision. However, if you are not satisfied with the Board's decision on any or all of the issues allowed, denied, or dismissed, you have the following options, which are listed in no particular order of importance: ?      Appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans  Claims (Court) ?      File with the Board a motion for reconsideration  of this decision ?      File with the Board a motion to vacate  this decision ?      File with the Board a motion for revision of this decision based on clear and unmistakable  error. Although it would not affect this BVA decision, you may choose to also: ?      Reopen  your claim at the local VA office by submitting new and material evidence. There is no time limit  for filing a motion for reconsideration,  a motion to vacate,  or a motion for revision based on clear and unmistakable  error with the Board, or a claim to reopen  at the local VA office. None of these things is mutually exclusive - you can do all five things at the same time if you wish. However, if you file a Notice of Appeal with the Court and a motion with the Board at the same time, this may delay your case because of jurisdictional conflicts. If you file a Notice of Appeal with the Court before you file a motion with the BVA, the BVA will not be able to consider your motion without the Court's permission.
How long do I have to start my appeal to the Court? You have 120 days from the date this decision was mailed to you (as shown on the first page of this decision) to file a Notice of Appeal with the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans  Claims. If you also want to file a motion for reconsideration  or a motion to vacate,  you will still have time to appeal to the Court. As long as you file your motion(s) with the Board within 120 days of the date this decision was mailed to you, you will then have another 120 days from the date the BVA decides the motion for reconsideration  or the motion to vacate  to appeal to the Court. You should know that even if you have a representative, as discussed below, it is your responsibility to make sure that your appeal to Court is filed on time.
How do I appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans  Claims? Send your Notice of Appeal to the Court at:
Clerk, U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans  Claims 625 Indiana Avenue, NW, Suite 900 Washington, DC 20004-2950
You can get information about the Notice of Appeal, the procedure for filing a Notice of Appeal, the filing fee (or a motion to waive the filing fee if payment would cause financial hardship), and other matters covered by the Court's rules directly from the Court. You can also get this information from the Court's web site on the Internet at www.vetapp.uscourts.gov, and you can download forms directly from that website. The Court's facsimile number is (202) 501-5848.
To ensure full protection of your right of appeal to the Court, you must file your Notice of Appeal with the Court, not with the Board, or any other VA office.
How do I file a motion for reconsideration?  You can file a motion asking  the BVA to reconsider any part of this decision by writing a letter to the BVA stating why you believe that the BVA committed an obvious error of fact or law in this decision, or stating that new and material military  service records have been discovered that apply to your appeal. If the BVA has decided more than one issue, be sure to tell us which issue(s) you want reconsidered. Send your letter to: Director, Management and Administration (014) Board of Veterans'  Appeals 810 Vermont Avenue, NW Washington, DC 20420
VA FORM JUN 2003 (RS) 4597 Page 1 CONTINUED
  Remember, the Board places no time limit  on filing a motion for reconsideration,  and you can do this at any time. However, if you also plan to appeal this decision to the Court, you must file your motion within 120 days from the date of this decision.
How do I file a motion to vacate?  You can file a motion asking  the BVA to vacate any part of this decision by writing a letter to the BVA stating why you believe you were denied due process of law during your appeal. For example, you were denied your right to representation through action or inaction by VA personnel, you were not provided a Statement of the Case or Supplemental Statement of the Case, or you did not get a personal hearing that you requested. You can also file a motion to vacate  any part of this decision on the basis that the Board allowed benefits based on false or fraudulent evidence. Send this motion to the address above for the Director, Management and Administration, at the Board. Remember, the Board places no time limit  on filing a motion to vacate,  and you can do this at any time. However, if you also plan to appeal this decision to the Court, you must file your motion within 120 days from the date of this decision.
How do I file a motion to revise the Board's decision on the basis of clear and unmistakable  error? You can file a motion asking  that the Board revise this decision if you believe that the decision is based on "clear and unmistakable  error" (CUE). Send this motion to the address above for the Director, Management and Administration, at the Board. You should be careful when preparing such a motion because it must meet specific requirements, and the Board will not review a final decision  on this basis more than once. You should carefully review the Board's Rules of Practice on CUE, 38 C.F.R. 20.1400 -- 20.1411, and seek help from a qualified representative before filing such a motion. See discussion on representation below. Remember, the Board places no time limit  on filing a CUE review motion, and you can do this at any time.
How do I reopen  my claim? You can ask your local VA office to reopen  your claim by simply sending them a statement indicating that you want to reopen  your claim. However, to be successful in reopening your claim, you must submit new and material evidence to that office. See 38 C.F.R. 3.156(a).
Can someone represent me in my appeal? Yes. You can always represent yourself in any claim before VA, including the BVA, but you can also appoint someone to represent you. An accredited representative of a recognized service organization may represent you free of charge. VA approves these organizations to help veterans,  service members, and dependents prepare their claims and present them to VA. An accredited representative works for the service organization and knows how to prepare and present claims. You can find a listing of these organizations on the Internet at: www.va.gov/vso. You can also choose to be represented by a private attorney or by an "agent." (An agent is a person who is not a lawyer, but is specially accredited by VA.)
If you want someone to represent you before the Court, rather than before VA, then you can get information on how to do so by writing directly to the Court. Upon request, the Court will provide you with a state-by-state listing of persons admitted to practice before the Court who have indicated their availability to represent appellants. This information is also provided on the Court's website at www.vetapp.uscourts.gov. 
Do I have to pay an attorney or agent to represent me? Except for a claim involving a home or small business  VA loan under Chapter 37 of title 38, United States Code, attorneys or agents cannot charge you a fee or accept payment for services they provide before the date BVA makes a final decision  on your appeal. If you hire an attorney or accredited agent within 1 year of a final BVA decision, then the attorney or agent is allowed to charge you a fee for representing you before VA in most situations. An attorney can also charge you for representing you before the Court. VA cannot pay fees of attorneys or agents.
Fee for VA home and small business  loan cases: An attorney or agent may charge you a reasonable fee for services involving a VA home loan or small business  loan. For more information, read section 5904, title 38, United States Code.
In all cases, a copy of any fee agreement between you and an attorney or accredited agent must be sent to:
Office of the Senior Deputy Vice Chairman (012) Board of Veterans'  Appeals 810 Vermont Avenue, NW Washington, DC 20420
The Board may decide, on its own, to review a fee agreement for reasonableness, or you or your attorney or agent can file a motion asking  the Board to do so. Send such a motion to the address above for the Office of the Senior Deputy Vice Chairman at the Board.
  VA FORM JUN 2003 (RS) 4597 Page 2

U.S. Board of Veterans Appeals


End of Document
Page 2 of 22004 BVA LEXIS 36704;  BVA 04-23568
Evan Seamone
Evan Seamone

